[Unknown]: IVM
[Amit Varma]: Before you start listening to the scene in the unseen the hundredth episode of simplified
[Amit Varma]: Releases today and I am a guest on it simplified is an awesome show hosted by my good friends
[Amit Varma]: Naren Chuck and Shrikith check that out as well
[Amit Varma]: We speak about fake news in that show and now on with the scene in the unseen
[Amit Varma]: It is an accident of birth that I happened to be born right-handed
[Amit Varma]: I've spent no time wondering what life would be like if I was left-handed or ambidextrous
[Amit Varma]: Right-handed people left-handed people ambidextrous people all get treated more or less the same in India
[Amit Varma]: They're allowed to express a handedness as it were and they're not discriminated against in any way
[Amit Varma]: It's also an accident of birth that I happen to be born heterosexual
[Amit Varma]: Unlike that earlier accident of birth though. This is one with huge implications if I hadn't been born heterosexual
[Amit Varma]: I don't like the word straight because it implies that those who are not straight must be crooked in some way if I hadn't been
[Amit Varma]: Born heterosexual I would have grown up full of self-doubt about my own normalcy
[Amit Varma]: Feeling a guilt and fear and confusion that I should not have had to feel I can imagine
[Amit Varma]: What it must be to grow up left-handed I?
[Amit Varma]: Can empathize but I'm not sure I can imagine what it would have been like to grow up gay in India
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen our weekly podcast on economics politics and behavioral science
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host Amit Bhadma
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen
[Amit Varma]: Today's episode is about being gay in India and my guest today is my friend Naveen Narona
[Amit Varma]: Naveen is a writer and a stand-up comedian
[Amit Varma]: You'll find relevant links in the page for the show at seen unseen.in
[Amit Varma]: And he is also an openly gay man whose work talks about what it is like to be gay
[Amit Varma]: His work talks about what it is like to grow up gay in India
[Amit Varma]: But that's not the only reason I invited him to be on this episode
[Amit Varma]: He also hosts a wonderful podcast which I often find poignant and also a laugh out loud funny in parts
[Amit Varma]: Called keeping it queer in which he talks to members of the queer community about their stories
[Amit Varma]: He's thus not just an artist in his own right but also someone who through this brilliant show
[Amit Varma]: Has drawn out different kinds of insight from a variety of gay people
[Amit Varma]: But before I begin my conversation with him let's take a quick commercial break
[Amit Varma]: Like me are you someone who loves fine art but can't really afford to have paintings by the artists you like hanging on your walls
[Amit Varma]: Well worry no more head on over to indiancolors.com
[Amit Varma]: Indian colors is a company that licenses images of the finest modern art from some of the best artists in India
[Amit Varma]: And adapts them into objects of everyday use
[Amit Varma]: These include wearable art like stoles and shrugs, home decor like cushion covers and table runners
[Amit Varma]: And accessories like tote bags
[Amit Varma]: This allows art lovers to actually get fine art into their homes at an accessible price
[Amit Varma]: And artists get royalties on sales just like authors do
[Amit Varma]: What's more Indian Colors now has an exciting range of new products including fridge magnets with some stunning motifs
[Amit Varma]: And salad bowls and platters made of mango wood
[Amit Varma]: Their artists include luminaries like Babu Xavier, Vazvo x Vazvo, Brinda Miller, Dilip Sharma, Shruti Nelson and Pradeep Mishra
[Amit Varma]: They accept bulk orders for corporate and festival gifting but even if you want to buy just for yourself or a friend
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to indiancolors.com
[Amit Varma]: That's colors with an OU
[Amit Varma]: And if you want a 20% discount apply the code IVM20
[Amit Varma]: That's IVM for IVM podcast
[Amit Varma]: IVM20 for a 20% discount at indiancolors.com
[Amit Varma]: Naveen welcome to the scene and the unseen
[Guest]: I just felt like goosebumps going to my body when you were introducing me
[Guest]: Because I didn't realize I've done so much
[Guest]: And you made it sound like oh shit this guy's done all this work
[Guest]: I just like do things and some of them do you know end up becoming better
[Amit Varma]: No and you've actually done more than I mentioned because last week I saw your fantastic show The Good Child
[Amit Varma]: The special that you're touring around the country
[Guest]: And I'd encourage listeners to watch out for that because it's really good
[Amit Varma]: And I was very moved by it I expected it to be funny because I know you're a funny guy
[Amit Varma]: But I was also very moved by the arc of your story and sort of the various
[Amit Varma]: The sense that for someone growing up you know in a suburb of Bombay Bhaindar as it were
[Amit Varma]: You had not just one but various coming outs at different levels
[Unknown]: And the story touched me deeply
[Amit Varma]: So I want to sort of spend the first half of this podcast talking about your childhood
[Amit Varma]: Like you were you know you used to go to church regularly you were a master of ceremonies I think
[Guest]: Yeah yeah for the longest time before I got into comedy I spent from my board exams that were done
[Guest]: At 16 to like 23 I was just hosting events
[Guest]: Like you know comparing birthday parties, baptisms, communions, weddings, engagement all kinds of shit
[Guest]: Like you know I was always the guy there you know like and leading it
[Guest]: Not only just being a master of ceremony for the heck of it
[Guest]: I would like sit down with the family, plan together
[Guest]: And there were ladies in my church would see me working for the church
[Guest]: And they would like have dreams about me becoming a priest one day
[Guest]: Like that was intensely what they believed in
[Guest]: And then some of them would die the next month and my mom would be like
[Guest]: Oh they were like really having prophetic thoughts because they were going to pass away soon
[Guest]: I'm like mom calm down
[Guest]: But at the age of 13 I was genuinely interested in going for the church
[Guest]: Because at around the same time I realized what my orientation was
[Guest]: And at the same time you know like everybody around me was so Catholic
[Guest]: And we had such blinders on
[Guest]: I kind of believed that this is my destiny because if God did not want me to be like a married man
[Guest]: Then this is what he would give me to make me more in touch with him
[Guest]: So I would spend more time in the church by default
[Guest]: So all my skills from talking publicly to like being artistic in any kind of way
[Guest]: Be it music or being in the choir
[Guest]: It was all cultivated within the church but my world was only limited to that
[Guest]: And that's when the whole first coming out phase happened
[Guest]: Because I realized that there's a world outside
[Guest]: Which is like you know if you go to the better suburbs like Bandra and Andheri
[Guest]: There's an entire cultural hotspot that is being birthed and we are not a part of that
[Guest]: So I would go to this place called Haivankar and you know do open mics over there
[Guest]: And then by default meet more cooler people who were doing cool things you know
[Guest]: There were poets, filmmakers, artists of all sorts
[Guest]: And within this the first proper understanding happened of how much I was losing out
[Guest]: By just being in a very small community of people who were just like you know
[Guest]: Whenever you did something nice they patted you on the back but where would that lead to?
[Guest]: And in that understanding I learned more about what the church was not telling us you know
[Guest]: The whole pedophilia racket and what was happening back in our own playground
[Guest]: And my mom and I would have vehement arguments about that
[Guest]: So hence the concern of like ever coming to terms with my orientation
[Guest]: Was diminished because of the fact that I grew up in such a staunch community that would never accept me
[Guest]: And hence the walking away from the church happened like a little more drastically than I imagined
[Guest]: But it had to happen I feel
[Amit Varma]: But so take me a little back earlier in your childhood
[Amit Varma]: And again I should apologize in advance if my questions seem very ignorant or insensitive in any way
[Amit Varma]: Because I'm just coming from a position of pure curiosity
[Amit Varma]: And also you grew up in a different time than you know I'm a fair bit older than you
[Amit Varma]: And you're 26, I'm 44, I grew up in a different time
[Amit Varma]: So and it's very hard for me to sort of imagine your childhood
[Amit Varma]: So growing up as a young person in Bhaindar
[Amit Varma]: At a time where you didn't have so much access to the media and the internet
[Amit Varma]: And so much of gay culture coming in
[Guest]: Exactly
[Amit Varma]: How was it that like what was the process like of discovering that you're gay
[Amit Varma]: And then how do you come to terms with those feelings?
[Guest]: I was always a loner kid per se
[Guest]: Like when we moved, we moved a lot of houses when I was younger
[Guest]: Because my parents are first generation immigrants to Bombay
[Guest]: So we just had to like move and find our own place
[Guest]: So when we finally got our own apartment
[Guest]: We moved to Bhaindar and I was like 7
[Guest]: And a lot of friendships happened within the kindergarten to like the first 3 years of schooling
[Guest]: And the last like later years because you're friends in school
[Guest]: But I didn't have any of those friends
[Amit Varma]: And this would be like 1999-2000
[Guest]: 1998 yeah
[Guest]: So 1999 when we were like really properly settled down
[Guest]: My sisters were much older than me
[Guest]: So they would go to college and my mom and dad were both like working really hard
[Guest]: To like make sure we could make ends meet
[Guest]: So I was left alone in my own imaginary world
[Guest]: So like you know in a very Andy Kaufman-esque style
[Guest]: I would sit against the bed, look at the wall
[Guest]: And make my own you know like pictures and everything
[Guest]: So I was always into like creating drama and art and everything
[Guest]: In my own head I would write scripts and everything
[Guest]: I still got those scribble little notes of like my handwriting
[Guest]: I would read Tinkle comics and then try to adapt those stories to like real life
[Guest]: So all of that was like you know a small part of my life
[Guest]: And I had very good friends who would play like imaginary friends with me as well at the same time
[Guest]: So very close circuit
[Guest]: I lost one of my really dear friends to like a spinal problem that he had
[Guest]: And since then I became a little more detached
[Guest]: So we were three of us very close to each other
[Guest]: And one of them moved to Russia
[Guest]: And one of them passed away
[Guest]: So like I felt like a lot of my life was going to be
[Guest]: Losing friends on different levels
[Guest]: And that kind of is also a very common theme across my life
[Guest]: That I become close to people and they either move out, move away
[Guest]: Or just like stop existing sometimes
[Guest]: So I've dealt with that kind of thing you know
[Guest]: Like why make friends or why make family
[Guest]: When they're all going to just like walk away from you
[Guest]: So it became easy for me when I grew up to like
[Guest]: Detach myself in the whole coming out phase
[Guest]: Because I just felt that there was a threshold I had reached
[Guest]: And the whole emotional gush that happens when you're first understanding
[Guest]: That you are feeling differently than the others
[Guest]: You don't have anybody to tell you know
[Guest]: Like as I joke about in my bit
[Guest]: That I would go to the girls and we'd talk about Spice Girls and stuff like that
[Guest]: At the same time the boys would try to show me straight porn
[Guest]: And try to see if that works on me
[Guest]: So it's like it was always a pendulum of being confused about what it is
[Guest]: And why are they feeling differently
[Guest]: Like you know like a boy and a girl would hold hands
[Guest]: And I would want that but not with a girl
[Guest]: You know like it's all kinds of weird thoughts and brainwaves
[Guest]: That you don't know how to define
[Guest]: And hence it's very important to understand at an early age
[Guest]: And in my travels I've figured out that a lot of schools
[Guest]: Not only just like better schools that are internationally controlled or whatever
[Guest]: Even the low level schools that are state run
[Guest]: Are now teaching kids about same sex relationships
[Guest]: Which is important because if there was somebody out there
[Guest]: Telling me it was okay back when I was 13 or 14
[Guest]: It would have been cool
[Guest]: I remember we did have a sex education class
[Guest]: And my ma'am clearly said that you know like
[Guest]: Because it's difficult to pass a hard stool
[Guest]: Imagine how painful anal sex is
[Guest]: And that's the only statement she said about gay sex
[Guest]: And I'm just like scratching my head waiting
[Guest]: Tell me more, I'm having all these feelings
[Guest]: And nothing is being answered
[Amit Varma]: She must have a raunchy life
[Amit Varma]: So basically you didn't have a framework
[Amit Varma]: Where you could put the way you were feeling
[Amit Varma]: It was just that you were different and you couldn't understand why
[Guest]: Nothing, nothing
[Guest]: I was like told that there's a word for it called Baila
[Guest]: Which is very commonly used in Bombay
[Guest]: Baila is like womanesque
[Guest]: So if you have a limp arm and if you behave a certain way
[Guest]: If your hips are whatever
[Guest]: You know if you do all of that
[Guest]: And that's again the picture Bollywood paints
[Unknown]: And we understand that
[Guest]: I remember when I was younger
[Guest]: I loved some of these movies that had a stereotypical gay character
[Guest]: And I'm like I'm not relating to this either
[Guest]: This is not me
[Guest]: So what is this definition that I'm trying to find
[Guest]: And hence getting access to Facebook and social media
[Guest]: Became very handy around when I was 17 or 18
[Guest]: I would go to cyber cafes and then sit and like you know
[Guest]: Start looking up shit
[Guest]: So on Awkward there were a lot of communities
[Guest]: A lot of gay communities that would have like chat rooms
[Guest]: And you couldn't talk to people who were counsellors
[Guest]: Yahoo Messenger happened
[Guest]: The whole ISL generation that we were exposed to
[Guest]: Was really handy for like people who were gay to communicate with each other
[Guest]: We sometimes look at internet as a very bad place
[Guest]: Because of how you can you know fall in trouble
[Guest]: But for a lot of gay youngsters
[Guest]: It becomes a very key factor in determining who they are
[Guest]: By talking to people who are the same you know
[Guest]: Like I made a pseudo account on Facebook
[Guest]: And I'm kind of proud of that
[Guest]: Because I would like go and talk to people from UK, US, Australia
[Guest]: Who were openly gay and you know
[Guest]: They were not ashamed of who they were
[Guest]: And they would talk to me about
[Guest]: How they're settling down with their partners
[Guest]: How marriages are still you know difficult to get in some parts
[Guest]: How they're hoping to find licenses
[Guest]: And all of that kind of inspired me to like then talk about it
[Guest]: I remember because in the article I talk about
[Guest]: The man I dated when I was 19
[Guest]: Who was 40 and we were you know like
[Guest]: Almost like two generations apart
[Guest]: But I still would sit down at a cafe with him
[Guest]: And tell him that you know
[Guest]: I would think about coming out
[Guest]: Because you know the world is so amazing
[Guest]: I want to come out
[Guest]: I want to talk about this
[Guest]: Be an activist
[Guest]: Try to figure out
[Guest]: How we can get more people like us to open up
[Guest]: Because there was clearly a market of people talking
[Guest]: Very hush hush you know
[Guest]: Behind these chat rooms
[Guest]: Why can't we bring them out in the open
[Guest]: And then I understood why we can't
[Guest]: Because then I figured out
[Guest]: How difficult life is as a gay man
[Guest]: So then the whole you know
[Amit Varma]: Internet factor happened
[Amit Varma]: You know in one of the conversations that I've heard of yours
[Amit Varma]: You talk about how you first came out
[Amit Varma]: To your close friend Amit
[Amit Varma]: Who was one of the three friends
[Amit Varma]: And the other one passed away
[Amit Varma]: And Amit went to Russia
[Amit Varma]: And you know
[Amit Varma]: And that was a very interesting story
[Amit Varma]: And is that the first time you were coming out to someone?
[Guest]: Exactly
[Guest]: No one knew before that
[Guest]: No one literally had any idea
[Guest]: And I remember
[Guest]: I was talking to my Canadian friend Richard
[Guest]: And he was like you know
[Guest]: If you want to tell somebody
[Guest]: Tell somebody who's grown up with you
[Guest]: So you can always confide in them
[Guest]: And based on how they react
[Guest]: You'll know how it's going to be further on
[Guest]: And both Amit and I
[Guest]: Come from very impoverished backgrounds
[Guest]: But with dreams of doing a lot of things
[Guest]: We were very inspired by
[Guest]: Tom Sawyer, Huckleberry Finn
[Guest]: Those kind of you know
[Guest]: Kid stories who would run away
[Guest]: And find their own new world
[Guest]: Because his family was very difficult to him
[Guest]: His father was a drunkard
[Guest]: And his mom got some back stuff
[Guest]: Injuries and stuff like that
[Guest]: So he had to really work
[Guest]: His entire life
[Guest]: So much so that
[Guest]: He accumulated all this money
[Guest]: Just to go and study abroad
[Guest]: But he wouldn't tell me
[Guest]: That he's leaving
[Guest]: Until like my last day of exams
[Guest]: Because he knew I would
[Guest]: F*** exams up
[Guest]: If he let me know beforehand
[Guest]: Because we had that kind of
[Guest]: Strong friendship you know
[Guest]: Even thinking about that
[Guest]: Is kind of emotional for me
[Guest]: But he's such kind of friend
[Guest]: That he would like
[Guest]: Have your back all the time
[Guest]: I'm like okay
[Guest]: I can tell him right now
[Guest]: And it was like a lot of preparation
[Guest]: We used to go out
[Guest]: On evening walks every day
[Guest]: We have this small
[Guest]: Little creek in Bayantar
[Guest]: Like say what you may
[Guest]: About Bayantar and its population
[Guest]: There's a nice little creek over there
[Guest]: Where you can
[Guest]: Really enjoy the sea breeze
[Guest]: And landings over there
[Guest]: And you can then
[Guest]: Look at Vasya
[Guest]: And laugh at them
[Amit Varma]: So
[Amit Varma]: People in Bayantar
[Amit Varma]: Laughing at someone
[Guest]: That's life
[Guest]: That's how you cooperate
[Guest]: Right
[Guest]: And so we would like
[Guest]: Think of one day
[Guest]: Crossing the creek
[Guest]: On our own little boat
[Guest]: And shit like that
[Guest]: Very very like
[Guest]: Gay stuff
[Guest]: If I may say so myself
[Guest]: And
[Guest]: Then like he said
[Guest]: Okay I'm moving to Russia
[Guest]: And I was kind of like
[Guest]: Very taken aback by that
[Guest]: I'm like oh my god
[Guest]: All these dreams we had
[Guest]: And all these
[Guest]: Advances we want to go to
[Guest]: But that was afterwards
[Guest]: Before that
[Guest]: I had to
[Guest]: Tell him about myself
[Guest]: And we went on
[Guest]: A nice little walk
[Guest]: And I built up to it
[Guest]: And
[Guest]: And it almost
[Guest]: Very naturally happened
[Guest]: When I told him
[Guest]: There was no
[Guest]: Pretence
[Guest]: Or there was no
[Guest]: Beating around the bush
[Guest]: And he just asked me
[Guest]: Did you ever get hurt
[Guest]: Like in some way
[Guest]: Like physically
[Guest]: Did someone assault you
[Guest]: Or whatever
[Guest]: So I was like
[Guest]: No there's nothing
[Guest]: Like that behind that
[Guest]: It's just like
[Guest]: I felt this way
[Guest]: And
[Guest]: I would like
[Guest]: Ask him a lot of times
[Guest]: And
[Guest]: Based on that
[Guest]: I would gauge
[Guest]: My friend's reaction
[Guest]: To see how much
[Guest]: They'd be okay with a man
[Guest]: Who's gay
[Guest]: And in their friend circle
[Guest]: Because if their
[Guest]: First image is someone
[Guest]: Touching them wrongly
[Guest]: In the train
[Guest]: Then they always have
[Guest]: That kind of fear
[Guest]: In real life as well
[Guest]: So you have to really
[Guest]: Calm them down
[Guest]: And make them know
[Guest]: That it's okay
[Guest]: We're all the same
[Guest]: And hence this happened
[Guest]: So he mulled over it
[Guest]: Overnight
[Guest]: Next day when he walked
[Guest]: He's like
[Guest]: It's okay
[Guest]: I read about it
[Guest]: It's all cool
[Guest]: Don't worry
[Guest]: It's cool to come on board
[Guest]: So when that
[Guest]: First acceptance
[Guest]: Happened that
[Guest]: Beautifully
[Guest]: There was no
[Guest]: Going back and forth
[Guest]: With that
[Guest]: I felt okay
[Guest]: This seems normal
[Guest]: So I can tell more friends
[Guest]: So we told one more
[Guest]: Friend of mine
[Guest]: Gaurav
[Guest]: And from there
[Guest]: My circle became
[Guest]: Bigger and bigger
[Guest]: And my support system
[Guest]: Initially was very strong
[Guest]: And some of them
[Guest]: Would sometimes laugh
[Guest]: And make fun
[Guest]: And everything
[Guest]: But I knew
[Guest]: They were doing it
[Guest]: In jest
[Guest]: Not so much
[Guest]: To insult me
[Guest]: Like one guy
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: It's not
[Amit Varma]: I am funny
[Amit Varma]: At other times
[Amit Varma]: Yeah
[Amit Varma]: You should see me in bed
[Guest]: So like that
[Guest]: So I had to
[Guest]: Be very patient
[Guest]: With all these friends
[Guest]: And they came around
[Guest]: In their own beautiful way
[Guest]: And I've had the most
[Guest]: Amazing learning
[Guest]: From this that
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: If you are
[Guest]: Who you are
[Guest]: And if you really
[Guest]: Own up to it
[Guest]: Then nothing's
[Guest]: Gonna stop you
[Guest]: Even though
[Guest]: Some people
[Guest]: Say they hate
[Guest]: Certain flamboyance
[Guest]: In their life or whatever
[Guest]: It's true to an extent
[Guest]: But beyond that
[Guest]: There will always be
[Guest]: People who have your back
[Guest]: I think that's one
[Guest]: Learning from all
[Guest]: The coming out stories
[Guest]: I've heard
[Guest]: That we eventually
[Guest]: End up finding
[Guest]: Our own families
[Amit Varma]: In our own beautiful ways
[Amit Varma]: So there's nothing
[Amit Varma]: Stopping you
[Amit Varma]: And these are people
[Amit Varma]: Who've kind of
[Unknown]: Grown up with you
[Amit Varma]: And known you
[Amit Varma]: And you know
[Amit Varma]: Been to school
[Amit Varma]: College with you
[Guest]: So it's a
[Guest]: Different matter
[Amit Varma]: They already know
[Amit Varma]: Who you are
[Amit Varma]: And they don't
[Amit Varma]: Apply those
[Amit Varma]: Instinctive stereotypes
[Amit Varma]: To you
[Amit Varma]: But apart from that
[Amit Varma]: You know
[Amit Varma]: Did you sense
[Amit Varma]: That it's a problem?
[Guest]: Well like
[Guest]: There's always
[Guest]: A certain level of
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: Mental blockage
[Guest]: That people have
[Guest]: When they talk to you
[Guest]: So they have
[Guest]: Curiosity
[Guest]: And I think
[Guest]: In a modern workplace
[Guest]: In Bombay at least
[Guest]: When you go and work
[Guest]: And you're open
[Guest]: About your orientation
[Guest]: No one really
[Guest]: Bothers you as such
[Guest]: There's no
[Guest]: Backlash
[Guest]: So to say
[Guest]: Nothing that I've felt
[Guest]: In fact
[Guest]: Because me working
[Guest]: At IVM was because
[Guest]: Of the fact that
[Guest]: I was very strongly
[Guest]: Talking about this
[Guest]: And it was
[Guest]: Like a mouthpiece
[Guest]: For me to channel
[Guest]: My energies
[Guest]: Into researching
[Guest]: More into this
[Guest]: Instead of just
[Guest]: Assuming everything is okay
[Guest]: So that's why
[Guest]: I feel that
[Guest]: It's important to have
[Guest]: An openness to your
[Guest]: Colleagues as well
[Guest]: Because then
[Guest]: They'll have
[Guest]: Dumb questions
[Guest]: Just answer those
[Guest]: Questions and move on
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: And then you can
[Guest]: Have the same kind
[Guest]: Of conversation
[Guest]: That you have
[Guest]: With someone
[Guest]: For example
[Guest]: If your colleague's
[Guest]: Like hey my husband's
[Guest]: Not in a mood today
[Guest]: Or whatever
[Guest]: It's my gay story
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: Like I want a normalcy
[Guest]: At every level
[Guest]: And that
[Guest]: We are still reaching
[Guest]: To that point
[Amit Varma]: Slowly and steadily
[Amit Varma]: But
[Guest]: And maybe you're lucky
[Guest]: To be in Bombay also
[Guest]: I imagine in a small town
[Guest]: I think yeah
[Guest]: We have to check
[Guest]: Our privileges
[Guest]: When it comes to this
[Guest]: It's much more
[Guest]: Difficult in smaller
[Guest]: Parts and pockets
[Guest]: But even
[Guest]: Some of the men
[Guest]: I've dated in the past
[Guest]: They're all working
[Guest]: In their own little spaces
[Guest]: Right
[Guest]: So
[Guest]: Despite the industry
[Guest]: That they're working in
[Guest]: They always find
[Guest]: A way to
[Guest]: Talk about it
[Guest]: You can always have
[Guest]: A small pocket
[Guest]: That you can always
[Guest]: Talk to
[Guest]: Because
[Guest]: You need that
[Guest]: Immediate support system
[Guest]: If you're going to work
[Guest]: Like 14 or 15 hours
[Guest]: Of your day
[Guest]: Find people who can
[Guest]: Understand what you're
[Guest]: Going through
[Guest]: Because if you're
[Guest]: Going to suffocate
[Guest]: On that very fact
[Guest]: For the longest time
[Guest]: It's going to be difficult
[Guest]: Because I remember
[Guest]: I was watching Milk
[Guest]: Which is a biography
[Guest]: On Harvey Milk
[Guest]: And
[Guest]: After like
[Guest]: Losing consecutively
[Guest]: For 2-3 times
[Guest]: For the parliament
[Guest]: And
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: People who we knew
[Guest]: Who were gay
[Guest]: Just go out and
[Guest]: Come out
[Guest]: Because
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: People who know you
[Guest]: Will again
[Guest]: Like care for you
[Guest]: Because they know you
[Guest]: And they work for you
[Guest]: Or they work with you
[Guest]: Or they understand
[Guest]: What your lifestyle is
[Guest]: Only after you
[Guest]: Really come out
[Guest]: And you have to show
[Guest]: That you're not
[Guest]: A minority anymore
[Guest]: And
[Guest]: I know it's a
[Guest]: Different experience
[Guest]: When you're coming out
[Guest]: To a larger chunk
[Guest]: Of people
[Guest]: But
[Unknown]: I think there is
[Guest]: In 2013
[Guest]: We saw a general rise
[Guest]: In coming out stories
[Guest]: Couples living
[Guest]: Couples
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: Posting photos together
[Guest]: And that is empowering
[Guest]: In it's own way
[Guest]: So I think we need
[Guest]: More of that
[Guest]: In the current time and age
[Guest]: Because again
[Guest]: We're fighting a regime
[Guest]: That does not care about us
[Guest]: When the supreme court
[Guest]: Asked the government
[Guest]: For an opinion
[Guest]: On section 377
[Guest]: This time around
[Guest]: They said
[Guest]: You know what
[Guest]: Do what you want to do
[Guest]: We don't care
[Guest]: That's the tone
[Guest]: That they're conveying
[Guest]: Every time
[Amit Varma]: So I wonder
[Amit Varma]: How much longer
[Amit Varma]: Will it last
[Amit Varma]: And
[Amit Varma]: How much longer
[Amit Varma]: Will there be
[Amit Varma]: We need to
[Amit Varma]: Act
[Amit Varma]: Now
[Amit Varma]: And
[Amit Varma]: We can
[Amit Varma]: Not
[Amit Varma]: Do this
[Amit Varma]: And
[Amit Varma]: We must
[Amit Varma]: Act
[Amit Varma]: Now
[Unknown]: Before
[Amit Varma]: We
[Amit Varma]: Can
[Guest]: Not
[Guest]: Do this
[Guest]: And
[Guest]: We must
[Guest]: We need
[Guest]: To
[Guest]: Act
[Guest]: Now
[Guest]: And
[Guest]: We must
[Guest]: Act
[Guest]: Now
[Guest]: and you know you have to really like invest your time and I would like pick jobs that
[Guest]: would allow me to like leave early at 7.30ish and then run to a mic and do one or two open
[Guest]: mics in the evening.
[Guest]: So every night I would go and I would do this material about what's it like coming out you
[Guest]: know and one advice I got as a comic was to stick to the material I'm doing for the first
[Guest]: six months, do that same four minutes everywhere so you can understand how that evolves automatically,
[Guest]: what funny bits remain and stuff like that.
[Guest]: And for the first six months I was mainly bombing with that material you know so it
[Guest]: became very difficult for me to like get spots and stuff like that and a lot of older comics
[Guest]: like Sapan Verma, Kunal Kamra and Zakir and Biswa would advise me to stick to it you know
[Guest]: don't don't change the narrative just because some jokes are not working because you have
[Guest]: a really strong idea of how you want to build this material.
[Guest]: So I would do that so from there it became easier for me to like channel my energy into
[Guest]: writing better material and you know you transition from the four minute phase to six minutes
[Guest]: and eight minutes and then 15 and stuff like that.
[Guest]: So I was working at Hive, I was writing comedy, I was doing some writing work on the side
[Guest]: as well.
[Guest]: All of this was going well and I was creating queer content so to say on my own.
[Guest]: We would do a small mic called the rainbow mic in Hive which was like calling all the
[Guest]: queer contestants to come and do whatever they wanted.
[Guest]: Some would like recite poetry, storytelling, dancing, you know slam poetry, comedy as well.
[Guest]: So all kinds of queer performers were given a chance to like do their work.
[Guest]: So that's when I found like oh my god there's an entire little undercircuit that we're building
[Guest]: and we're not even realizing that this is a movement on its own you know.
[Guest]: And there was not much happening as I said there was like always the gay party scene
[Guest]: but culturally for like the queers in Bombay and other metropolitan cities not much was
[Guest]: happening as much as I wanted to you know see.
[Guest]: So we were doing the small little thing and from there I began again like you know questioning
[Guest]: whether like sooner or later will they find out because I now had half an hour of material
[Guest]: about coming out and my friends and homophobic.
[Amit Varma]: And was any of it on YouTube or anything?
[Amit Varma]: Not yet.
[Guest]: There was only like some bits of it like here and there.
[Guest]: Somebody lost my footage also which was I think thankful because back then I was not
[Guest]: ready for that footage to come out.
[Guest]: And there was another comic called Nick Pillow who's a white guy who's been teaching drama
[Guest]: in Bombay for the longest time.
[Guest]: So somebody told me he's also a queer comic.
[Guest]: So we came together and did a show called Homo's Odyssey which again a pun on Homo's
[Guest]: Odyssey.
[Guest]: You like puns.
[Guest]: I love puns.
[Guest]: And so Homo's Odyssey became like this one two person show where you know do a lot of
[Guest]: little acts together like we would do small sketches interspersed with a stand up as well.
[Guest]: And might I say the first stand up comedy kiss on stage.
[Unknown]: Oh wow.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: We do have photos to prove but we can't put it online.
[Guest]: But we went there.
[Guest]: We actually wanted to like you know take it a little more like how much can people see
[Guest]: two men kissing on stage and be uncomfortable.
[Guest]: That sort of stuff.
[Guest]: And then Nick moved on with his life.
[Guest]: He's now engaged and going to get married.
[Guest]: And then I was like okay now I have to do my show.
[Guest]: I have to still proceed with my material.
[Guest]: And I ended up doing Coming Out Soon which was a trial show.
[Amit Varma]: And that was like again which morphed into The Good Child which I saw last week.
[Guest]: But throughout this I remember Sharon who's the co-founder of The Hive and now Ku Klub.
[Guest]: I was talking to her and she's like you know what dude two years of comedy and you've been
[Guest]: doing so much work with the LGBT stuff.
[Guest]: When will you tell your parents?
[Guest]: And I'm like that's a legit question Sharon.
[Guest]: I can't I can't imagine.
[Guest]: And hence like as I told you like I had to come out on different levels.
[Guest]: So after engineering I quit and became a writer and then after that I became an atheist as
[Guest]: I told you.
[Guest]: So there were already like too many blows I was giving out to my family which was staunchly
[Amit Varma]: conservative.
[Amit Varma]: Like both my sisters are married.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me about these different blows.
[Guest]: How did they go down?
[Guest]: Like always like dramatically like it's it's not easy like I remember the way I left L&T
[Guest]: was like which the company I was hired to work for.
[Amit Varma]: You're an engineer.
[Guest]: I'm an engineer.
[Guest]: Telecom engineer by qualification.
[Guest]: But I got placed in Larsen and Toubro Infotech which is IT and I don't know IT.
[Guest]: And they're trying to like teach me programming and coding and I'm just dyslexic when it comes
[Unknown]: to like coding.
[Guest]: So I left after two weeks.
[Guest]: I still got a small paycheck and I was like I came home and mom's like tomorrow what time
[Guest]: do you have to go to work?
[Guest]: I'm like I'm not going.
[Guest]: She's like why?
[Guest]: I'm like I just quit.
[Guest]: I did not want to do this.
[Guest]: And then just like became like an entire silent period for my father was like no talking for
[Guest]: three months and just like cold hearted like you know stone cold treatment.
[Guest]: And mom was still like have you figured out what you want to do and all that.
[Guest]: And I remember the last day of not the last day but like they had to give us a test to
[Guest]: pass us and see how we can fare for three months and then they give us jobs right.
[Guest]: So when everybody else was studying I was sitting and writing a poem which I called
[Guest]: across the bridge which was like a very metaphorical.
[Amit Varma]: Did you have it on you?
[Guest]: I do.
[Guest]: One second.
[Guest]: So this is a very rhyme to rhyme kind of poem but here's what it says.
[Guest]: There's a boat in the river at the edge of the ridge.
[Guest]: The boatman beckons to take you across the bridge.
[Guest]: You've heard about the other side.
[Guest]: You know it's bright and lovely.
[Guest]: You stand at the edge and ponder if it's worth being sad and lonely.
[Guest]: You make a decision.
[Guest]: You take the leap.
[Guest]: You land on the boat.
[Guest]: The edge though steep.
[Guest]: The currents are strong.
[Guest]: The journey is tough.
[Guest]: The water is coarse.
[Guest]: It's choppy.
[Guest]: It's rough.
[Guest]: You're scared to cross.
[Guest]: Now you risk a glance.
[Guest]: Your friends and family say you've missed your chance.
[Guest]: The chance to stick to the regular show, the chance to be ordinary and cheat your core.
[Guest]: The belief it surges and so does the wave.
[Guest]: You don't need to look back.
[Guest]: You're far too brave.
[Guest]: The storm descends.
[Guest]: The boat sails calm.
[Guest]: The bridge it passes.
[Guest]: You're befuddled with charm.
[Guest]: The other shore arrives.
[Guest]: You begin to strut.
[Guest]: You know now the journey was tough but worth.
[Guest]: The loneliness has vanished.
[Guest]: You're relieved and glad.
[Guest]: The past won't haunt you now.
[Guest]: The past you once had.
[Amit Varma]: Lovely.
[Amit Varma]: And you were writing this while during that last run too, bro?
[Guest]: Yeah, study break.
[Guest]: And then they threw me out as they should have.
[Guest]: And then like, you know, they didn't talk to me for a while.
[Guest]: My mom and dad were really like upset about it.
[Guest]: I just looked up like writing jobs available for the for the lowest amount of money I could
[Guest]: work for.
[Guest]: And I got a content writing job, which was like nice and you know, I had to write product
[Guest]: descriptions for like Amazon and Jabang and all these websites.
[Guest]: So that was fun, not too extensive, like they would give us like some 20 products, and they
[Guest]: would like write about this.
[Guest]: So I would like finish my quota every night.
[Guest]: And that's when I started like going home late at night and you know, meeting people
[Guest]: with different kinds of stuff to offer, you know, and that's when I would like be enlightened
[Guest]: a little bit like traveling home at night on YouTube, like going to the weirder side
[Guest]: of YouTube to find comedy and look at like a lot of improv work.
[Guest]: So that's when I discovered Bill Hicks and George Carlin and, and Wanda Sykes and all
[Guest]: these stand up comedians I'd never heard of, but like I would love their material because
[Guest]: they were like so weird and edgy.
[Guest]: And hence I decided to like go and do an open mic at some point in my life.
[Amit Varma]: And that's where I ended up at like Hive and did my first open mic.
[Amit Varma]: So we'll we'll we'll continue to explore your journey in comedy and and your journey in
[Unknown]: coming out to your parents right after a short commercial break.
[Unknown]: Cool.
[Unknown]: So this week on IVM, there's a lot to look forward to for our listeners.
[Unknown]: If you're not following us on social media, please do we're IVM podcast on Twitter, Facebook
[Unknown]: and Instagram.
[Unknown]: We have an interview lined up with the young actor Ishan Khattar on Cyrus Says.
[Unknown]: This conversation is about his foray into acting and living up to high expectations.
[Unknown]: On Simplified is the 100th episode which we recorded live with Dulali featuring guests
[Unknown]: Amit Verma and Varun Dhupirala.
[Unknown]: And for all of those looking to step into the food and hospitality business, the podcast
[Unknown]: that should definitely make your priority list is the Kulabakar Tale.
[Unknown]: This week, there's an important conversation taking place between Gauri, Pankil, Abhishek
[Unknown]: and myself about restaurant investments, who the ideal investor for a restaurant would
[Unknown]: be and more.
[Unknown]: Also catch Paisa Vaisa where Anupam talks to Prashant Thakur of Anurag Property Consultants
[Unknown]: about real estate basics like buying, renting and selling property.
[Unknown]: On the Vishal Gondar show, Vishal speaks to Yashraj Akashi, someone responsible for curating
[Unknown]: the TEDx conference in India.
[Unknown]: On the Pragati podcast, Pawan and Hamsini are joined by strategic communications experts
[Unknown]: Saurabh and Dayton to discuss how the ecosystem of Washington DC has changed since Donald
[Unknown]: Trump became the president.
[Unknown]: On Pulyabati, Pranay and Saurabh discuss Pakistan's trust with the military jihadi complex.
[Unknown]: We're also looking to hire a producer, a social media intern and a graphic designer.
[Unknown]: So write to us at jobs at IndusVox.com if you want to come work with us.
[Unknown]: And with that, let's continue with your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene and the unseen listeners.
[Amit Varma]: I'm with Naveen Narona of Keeping it Queer and the Good Child fame.
[Amit Varma]: So Naveen, you were talking about, you know, you're coming out to your parents in phases
[Amit Varma]: and your first coming out has nothing to do with your sexual identity, but simply that
[Amit Varma]: you didn't want to follow the conventional route and be of an engineer and wanted to
[Unknown]: be a writer and stuff like that.
[Amit Varma]: And how did that kind of proceed?
[Amit Varma]: How did they come to terms with it?
[Guest]: It was really difficult because there was more money in engineering, obviously.
[Guest]: So I had to like make enough money on the side to make sure that I could like, you know,
[Guest]: make ends meet.
[Guest]: And the first job did offer like a decent package.
[Guest]: And from there, I also would like do DMC on the weekends, they said, so that would give
[Guest]: me some more money.
[Guest]: So overall, I was like taking care of the house now slowly.
[Guest]: And hence, like, there was still a certain level of attachment to the family.
[Guest]: But they were constantly aware that I was not making as well and don't keep constantly,
[Guest]: you know, planting it in my head again and again that, hey, if you were doing this would
[Guest]: have been happier.
[Guest]: Maybe you can go back to it.
[Guest]: And I was like, no, I've left that life behind entirely.
[Guest]: I was happy doing what I was doing.
[Guest]: So it was like, for the longest time, I did not emote so much at home, which I also regret
[Guest]: now because I could have been more abrupt about it.
[Guest]: And, you know, like, I just tried to like, placate everybody at the same time and make
[Guest]: sure I could hold all those things together.
[Guest]: Because one of the main reasons coming out is difficult in India, because what if they
[Guest]: throw me out and I have to like, then be on the streets.
[Guest]: So I just have to make sure that I can make sure I can earn enough money at the same time
[Guest]: and take care of myself if that whole phase happens when I have to go out.
[Guest]: And then the second coming out happened around the same time because I was so away from the
[Guest]: church for a while that I did not want to go back to it and, you know, be in the same
[Guest]: environment with the same kind of homophobic because religion is kind of like very handy
[Guest]: when it comes to homophobia.
[Guest]: People start quoting lines and stuff like that, which I don't want to deal with.
[Guest]: So proactively, I stopped going to church and that was a very hateful period in my house
[Guest]: because they could not take that at all.
[Guest]: Like, you know, I was raised in such a strong household that for me, not going to church
[Guest]: was like the biggest sin I'd ever committed in my entire life.
[Amit Varma]: And looking back retrospectively, would you say you were ever a believer in God per se
[Amit Varma]: or you got so involved in the church because of the community and cultural aspects of it?
[Guest]: That's the latter.
[Guest]: I think like we eventually end up saying that we believe in God and we love him and everything.
[Guest]: But older I grew, obviously, there was a more sense of, oh, wait, like, what if there's
[Guest]: a supreme being that we don't know how to put a name to?
[Guest]: And then you will see all the killings that are happening in the name of religion and
[Guest]: you know, you read a little bit and you understand that, oh, all of this is kind of made up and
[Guest]: the crusades happened.
[Guest]: So you know, like when you would think about all of these things, you'd be like, oh, wait,
[Guest]: like let's take a backtracking mechanism here and be like, the main reason you liked it
[Guest]: so much because everybody's just like so into you and they all praise you and they all want
[Guest]: to make the best out of what they're given sort of.
[Guest]: So like our church annual parties and, you know, family gatherings and all that were
[Guest]: like pretty famous because you'd pay 60 bucks and then get a raffle ticket for Easter and
[Guest]: at the same time eat free biryani and shit like that.
[Guest]: So they keep you in the system like that, you know, don't call free biryani shit like
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: Oh, I've been on a keto diet all of this year, I'd do anything for a biryani.
[Guest]: Oh, me too.
[Amit Varma]: I'm going tonight to have somebody, I'm afraid I can't.
[Guest]: Don't send me pictures.
[Guest]: It'll be on Instagram tomorrow morning.
[Amit Varma]: I don't follow you on Instagram anymore.
[Guest]: So yeah, it was good to have that system.
[Guest]: But you know, I yearned for more, as I said, like, it's just it's so much easier to understand
[Guest]: that sometimes all the hard work you do has a payoff, instead of people subverting you
[Guest]: and telling you you're doing a good job.
[Guest]: So when I start deviating from the church, it was really difficult for my family to digest
[Guest]: the fact by default, like it was, it was like the biggest travesty and I was so now like
[Amit Varma]: nobody's business.
[Amit Varma]: Is there a moment where you announced to them that there is a clean cut between you and
[Guest]: the church or an atheist now?
[Guest]: There was like my mom and my sister were at home and they were trying to like really argue
[Guest]: and debate about why I'm not believing in all of this.
[Guest]: Like I would not even step out of my room when they would start praying and my family
[Guest]: is such for like 30 minutes before the midnight, before dinner every night, we spent 30 minutes
[Guest]: praying like, you know, kneeling down and raising our hands in the air kind of like
[Guest]: crazy stuff.
[Guest]: So I would just like stop participating in that and my sister was like, tell me why?
[Guest]: And I'd be like, look at the whole way it's skewed and look at all this pedophilia and
[Guest]: look at all how the church is, you know, like taking money from people, not helping them,
[Guest]: all of that.
[Guest]: Like, why is there so much disparity in African kids and Indian kids, we are so entitled,
[Guest]: And my mom was like, just like for, for like five days more, go to church and try it out.
[Guest]: I'm like, for five days, mom, you try to be an atheist, you stop believing in God and
[Guest]: stop going to church.
[Guest]: So like, how can you make me do something I don't want to do?
[Guest]: And I'm like, touche, right now, that's what exactly what's happening.
[Guest]: And she was like, oh, wait, then she actually took a step back and she realized she was
[Guest]: doing the same thing to me, which I wanted her to do for a change.
[Guest]: And then she was a little more calmer after that, she was like, okay, I think it's your
[Guest]: call.
[Guest]: But my dad, again, like my dad always goes to the extreme, does not exactly, he does
[Guest]: not talk to me, talk to me, but also does not, like, he pulls the strings from the background,
[Guest]: basically, he'll talk to my mom about something and he'll surnow her, and then her head is
[Guest]: hurting because of my dad constantly, you know, bickering with her.
[Guest]: So I was feeling like I'm causing all this stress in my family, I might as well move
[Guest]: out now itself, because it's easier to like, just vanish from their lives.
[Guest]: Again, a very stupid, impulsive teenage decision, I'm not even a teenager back then, I was 23.
[Guest]: But I felt like going away from the house for some time would have been helpful.
[Guest]: But that did not help at all, like they were crying more than they were usually doing that.
[Guest]: And my dad would like, my dad picked up his phone and called me and I knew like shit's
[Guest]: going down because he hardly calls me.
[Guest]: And he's like, you've just like, gone and haven't told us where you are and what's happening.
[Guest]: So after like 15 days, I finally got back home.
[Guest]: And that's when I sat my mom down and I told her first.
[Guest]: And there was a plan in action where it was like her birthday approaching, so we would
[Guest]: not tell the entire family until her birthday.
[Guest]: So we could like keep this between mother and son and then slowly tell the rest of the
[Guest]: family in a more civilized manner when they all gathered together.
[Guest]: So I could also do my piece and be like, hey, let me decentralize you, instead of you all
[Guest]: just like assuming things.
[Guest]: But my mom could not keep it inside and this is your third coming out of saying that, yeah.
[Guest]: And this was the final official for me like being openly gay sort of thing.
[Guest]: And I was like, the whole world knows, everybody knows, everybody's cool with it.
[Amit Varma]: I just want you all to be okay with it.
[Amit Varma]: And you've prepared them like first you're a writer, then you're an atheist and what
[Guest]: can get worse and your dad is thinking it's okay, it can't get worse.
[Guest]: And yeah, so like I was expecting my mom to not tell anybody and I remember it was a Monday.
[Guest]: So we had Monday.
[Amit Varma]: How did your mom react?
[Guest]: So she was very chill.
[Guest]: Like she just like, looked into the distance and like, I've heard about people.
[Guest]: And she told me about one of her family relatives who was gay and married a woman and then would
[Guest]: still go and have sex with men.
[Guest]: And when his wife finally found out she lost her marbles, like she literally went insane.
[Guest]: They had to put her in an asylum.
[Guest]: And I was just like, do you want that future for me, mom?
[Guest]: Because if I marry a woman tomorrow, as per your wishes, I'll end up like not satisfying
[Guest]: her and she'll then like blame us and you know, all that racket.
[Guest]: And a lot of people do live that lifestyle.
[Guest]: And she was like, you know what, like, it's okay, I understand, I can live with the fact
[Guest]: that there are people who are gay out there.
[Guest]: But it's just difficult because I think you're my son and how will you lead a life like that?
[Guest]: And that's why I was like, it's okay, because I've told a lot of people and they all chill
[Guest]: with it and they're all like supporting and really understanding.
[Guest]: I just want you all to be in my corner.
[Guest]: But I think I don't know how she took it that night.
[Guest]: She mulled over it because when I told her it was cool, because I went to an open mic
[Guest]: directly after that moment, and I went and declared that open mic that for two years,
[Guest]: I've been trying to come out to my family and tonight it actually happened.
[Guest]: I have footage of that.
[Guest]: And people were applauding and it was pretty good.
[Guest]: Kanan Gill was hosting that night.
[Guest]: He was really happy.
[Guest]: Like he went and joked about how dreams come true at open mics and stuff like that.
[Guest]: And it was a really positive moment in my life for a change.
[Guest]: But the very next day, I felt like there was some amount of disdain in my house.
[Guest]: The air hung very like serious and my mom and dad and my sister were both like staring
[Guest]: at me with intense, like, you know, like, I actually went bald the same week I came
[Guest]: out, which is not the smartest move because now they had two reasons to hate me.
[Amit Varma]: Because I had like...
[Amit Varma]: Well done.
[Guest]: Tactically brilliant.
[Guest]: At least my hair came back, I'm still gay that way.
[Guest]: So so you know, they were like, not getting what I was trying to tell them.
[Guest]: And then I called my friend who's also a gay activist.
[Guest]: And he was like, if you want to come home and stay with us, you can sort the situation
[Guest]: out, don't worry.
[Guest]: But I would say stay back, talk to them.
[Guest]: So this was from a Monday to Friday, it was just constant, you know, like, should I leave?
[Guest]: Should I stay?
[Amit Varma]: Should I leave?
[Guest]: And how did your dad react?
[Guest]: He was again stone cold.
[Amit Varma]: He just like he goes into his whole...
[Amit Varma]: He wouldn't talk to you.
[Guest]: Like he goes into a gargoyle mode where he just like ignores my existence altogether.
[Guest]: And like, again, all the talking happens to my mother, right?
[Guest]: And hence when, like when I came out, he was again like not understanding.
[Guest]: So I used Aamir Khan's Satyamev Jayate episode on LGBT rights to show it to them that, hey,
[Guest]: there are more people like me, watch this video, Aamir Khan's cool about it.
[Guest]: So why can't you be cool about it?
[Guest]: So that weekend, that Saturday or Sunday, I showed them the video, and then they softened
[Guest]: up a little bit.
[Guest]: So a whole week of like, softened up as in, they're like, yeah, it's okay, dad, you're
[Guest]: okay.
[Guest]: They finally said that line.
[Guest]: Like, you know, we understand it's okay, but don't do something wrong, was the idea.
[Guest]: Because my mom was like, okay, there's still people who are gay, just immediately they
[Guest]: have AIDS.
[Unknown]: Like, that's how it works.
[Guest]: I'm like, no.
[Guest]: But then you have to, again, pick your battles every day, one at a time.
[Guest]: And I decided to come out first and then talk about the other stuff in life.
[Amit Varma]: In some sense, I mean, I mean, you spoke about this a lot.
[Amit Varma]: And it was the whole narrative was very moving in the show that you did The Good Child.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that kind of struck me there was that, you know, up till this
[Amit Varma]: point, you could say your parents brought you up, but now suddenly you were bringing
[Amit Varma]: them up by revealing all these aspects of yourselves and forcing them to grow, to kind
[Amit Varma]: of accept you as you are.
[Guest]: And a lot of growing up happens between these conversations.
[Guest]: Because around the same time, my mom's main, you know, concern that year was that while
[Guest]: I came out to her, my sister, who also had an autistic kid was diagnosed autistic that
[Guest]: year.
[Guest]: So it was like a double blow, she felt almost like, you know, and in a very weird way, like,
[Guest]: my sister's kids, autism kind of helped her cope with the fact that, hey, I did not have
[Guest]: a choice in how I chose my orientation, because the kid did not choose how he would have a
[Guest]: social anxiety in life.
[Guest]: You know, like, so even though it's weird that it's a it's a mental illness, and orientation
[Guest]: is not the same, you know, not the same level, I still choose to be like, hey, at least it's
[Guest]: helping her understand and deal with it, you know, you can be very politically correct
[Guest]: at the same time with your parents, because there's always going to be some level of weirdness
[Guest]: to it.
[Guest]: So I shave my face, she's like, you know what, I like you better with a beard, because that
[Guest]: looks more manly on you, you look more effeminate, I'm like, Mom, how can you say such amazing
[Guest]: things and weird things at the same time?
[Guest]: That's how mothers are.
[Guest]: They are just like, they're concerned about you, but they'll take it in their stride eventually
[Guest]: by just like letting them love you for who you are again.
[Guest]: So that's, that's my main point that if you don't stop pretending, you'll never know how
[Amit Varma]: your family is going to like you and you know,
[Amit Varma]: And does that normalcy extend to for example, like, have you ever taken any of the men you
[Amit Varma]: were dating home or any of your gay activist friends and you know, how does the family
[Guest]: react to that?
[Guest]: Well, I've met some of my gay friends, but I've never brought anybody home.
[Guest]: I think they're still a little far away.
[Guest]: And like, they know that I'm doing comedy and I talk about this and I give interviews
[Guest]: and it's all over the newsletter.
[Guest]: So they know for a fact that there's some level of publicity that goes with my work.
[Guest]: And I think it's okay, because I tell them I'm doing it for the right reasons, you know.
[Guest]: And eventually, my mom and I do talk about like, when I'm going out with like, you know,
[Guest]: what's it like to have lived inside the closet and outside the closet, and this whole conversation
[Guest]: goes on for a while.
[Guest]: But I'm still not like seriously going to take her to meet a guy I'm dating and vice
[Amit Varma]: versa.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, for a gay person, as opposed to a straight person, the process of finding
[Amit Varma]: love is very difficult, finding love, finding companionship, and so on, you know, straight
[Amit Varma]: men do it through, you know, whatever the normal socializing you do, and you like someone
[Amit Varma]: and you hit on them.
[Amit Varma]: And if it's Bollywood, then you EFTs them till they give in.
[Amit Varma]: But for someone like you, it's a very fraught process, because you might keep bumping into
[Amit Varma]: homophobia in different places.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, how did that kind of process work out where you start, where you start
[Amit Varma]: finding companionship and that kind of friendship?
[Guest]: So there's obviously online dating, which has helped a lot of people meet cool people
[Guest]: around the world.
[Guest]: And that's what I found, like, my past relationships have been of three different apps.
[Guest]: So that way, I've been like meeting enough number of people overall.
[Guest]: In fact, I made like a list for my ex when I was dating him that these are the men I've
[Guest]: slept with in my past and beyond this, there won't be anybody else but you.
[Unknown]: Wow.
[Guest]: Very naive move because there was the list continues to this day.
[Guest]: But you know, I tell every new lover, I do I do I'm very on the face sort of because
[Guest]: like it is like when you're going to the whole world of gay dating.
[Guest]: It's very easy to get sex because it's just like it's that easy.
[Guest]: It's like, you know, nobody knows no one keeps a track of it.
[Guest]: The thrill of it is what actually excites a lot of people like it's all behind closed
[Guest]: doors and everything.
[Guest]: So it's easy to get laid.
[Guest]: But then when someone says translate this love outside where you can walk on the street
[Guest]: on the pavement with your partner's hand in your hand, or you know, go on dates and stuff
[Guest]: like that, it immediately becomes a problem because then you're acting like two bros on
[Guest]: a date who won't sit on the same side of the table, won't feed each other, you know, the
[Guest]: cutesy things you want to do because you have to, you have to act a certain way.
[Guest]: So again, like, you know, this happened because as soon as you want to show your love, it
[Guest]: becomes too cumbersome for some people.
[Guest]: And that's how most relationships don't work out in the long run.
[Guest]: People online will tell you that he's looking for hookups and not for like longevity.
[Guest]: And again, just like go from one guy to the other hoping that this one works out.
[Guest]: So that was like for the longest time.
[Guest]: And I was very gullible in my early 20s.
[Guest]: I feel like because I was so bought up on the idea for Mills and Boones-esque love story
[Guest]: where the whole world is like, you know, behind you and you're like riding on the beach with
[Guest]: like a horse or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: Not the guy, but riding on the beach with a horse and a guy.
[Guest]: So I had a very, very rom-com-esque look at life and didn't work out really well because
[Guest]: nobody was willing to come out of the closet even like to meet me halfway.
[Guest]: I think every woman is looking for a man like you who looks at the world like that.
[Guest]: But yeah, eventually we all end up being jaded.
[Guest]: So it's cool.
[Guest]: Like, you know, like right now at 26, 27, I'm like...
[Amit Varma]: But are you jaded or when you meet the next man, will you again be a romantic?
[Guest]: I am dating a very young kid right now.
[Guest]: I'm dating a 20-year-old who used to stalk me before I got to know who he was.
[Guest]: Basically, he watched me live at a stand-up show and then was following up with my social
[Guest]: media work and then finally got the courage to say, hey, I like you and I met him and
[Guest]: it's kind of cute.
[Guest]: So yeah.
[Guest]: So it's like, you know, in a weird way, like I didn't have to resort to like online dating
[Guest]: to find this person because they were already there in my life before I realized it, you
[Guest]: know.
[Guest]: And hence, it's cool to like go out and associate, go to parties and situations.
[Guest]: But again, my brand with parties, again, is that they all just like come together and
[Guest]: couples have a good time.
[Guest]: But people who are looking for love or for sex that night end up meeting each other and
[Guest]: hooking up for that one night.
[Guest]: And I sometimes end up being worried about like, what's the health situation?
[Guest]: And you don't know because you meet someone randomly and that night you will have sex.
[Guest]: And a lot of people do not tell you about what their STD situation is.
[Guest]: And how do you know that?
[Guest]: So you have to like worry about that as well.
[Guest]: So a lot of things go on in your mind when you're going out there, you know, it's not
[Guest]: it's not just like, you go and meet the man of your dreams overnight.
[Guest]: It's a trial and error method and again, like get checked every two or three months.
[Amit Varma]: So I think in around 2007, when I was writing a column for Mint, I'd written this piece
[Amit Varma]: called the Matunga racket, a friend of mine, Vikram doctor had put me on to something that
[Amit Varma]: used to happen where cops would basically go online and they'd hook up with gay men
[Unknown]: pretending to be a gay man themselves and call them to Matunga station.
[Amit Varma]: And when the person landed up in Matunga station, they'd grab him and take him to his ATM machine
[Amit Varma]: and take out whatever cash and basically blackmail the guy using 377 I mean, like all bad laws,
[Guest]: it was a rent seeking mechanism for them.
[Guest]: Does that kind of thing still happen?
[Guest]: It still happens.
[Guest]: My friend who went to Delhi last week got extorted by two dudes.
[Guest]: Like even if it's not cops, it's other men only who are trying to run a racket on online.
[Guest]: And because section 377 is so highly spoken about, people use it all the time to extort
[Guest]: money out of people and you know, they'll rob you, they'll beat you up, they'll go come
[Guest]: to your hotel room.
[Guest]: Because again, like the trust factor is so weird on these online dating apps.
[Guest]: People don't show their face and you've seen me joke about that as well when I speak about
[Guest]: Grindr is that like people do not want to show that they're gay on Grindr.
[Guest]: And if that person is on Grindr, it's because they're gay, unless they're trying to extort
[Guest]: you and they can't extort you for being gay in this country, unless they catch you in
[Guest]: the act of carnal intercourse, there's no way they can send you to jail for being gay.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you should really just brazen it out.
[Amit Varma]: But I think the main fear of most of the people who get caught is that their family will be
[Amit Varma]: told they might not have come out.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: But then again, that's the system it's feeding itself, you know, we don't come out because
[Guest]: we're scared about like what the society will say, society will say something because we're
[Guest]: not coming out.
[Guest]: It's a vicious cycle of...
[Amit Varma]: If you just come out and you can do it fearlessly, then that's...
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Then they won't say, oh, you're gay, I'll tell your family.
[Guest]: Sure, go ahead.
[Guest]: I told my family before you, I beat you to it.
[Guest]: Give me money now.
[Guest]: That's how you extort the money out of them.
[Guest]: I don't know, because I've found so much comfort in telling people that I can't imagine living
[Guest]: that kind of suffocated life.
[Guest]: We're trying to like meet all your life's goals at the same time, worry about this constantly
[Guest]: that you can't tell your family or they'll find out someday and then how will they react.
[Guest]: Dealing with that guilt is so difficult sometimes that just saying it out loud helps you.
[Guest]: This went out so much of the of the aggression that you've lived with your entire life, you
[Guest]: know, like with my mom at every stage in my life from the point I was 15 when I could
[Guest]: like, you know, reaffirm my thoughts.
[Guest]: That thing was always there on my albums, I'd be like right here, I would hold on to
[Guest]: it and not tell her.
[Guest]: And I just regret I had wish I told her earlier so everything that happened in my life afterwards
[Guest]: would have been much more easier to deal with, you know, I could have gone into the arts
[Guest]: much easily instead of having to struggle and try to please them at every level.
[Guest]: That's what we're told as Indian kids, right, just please your parents at every level.
[Guest]: But if you just come out and be who you are, and just tell them like for the for the from
[Guest]: the very beginning that you do not care about the world's opinion, because you can do what
[Guest]: you want to do in your life eventually.
[Guest]: And who you want to do in your life eventually, you'll find that kind of happiness.
[Guest]: And I think it's for everybody in this community to take that control of that life.
[Guest]: Because as soon as you let these powers extort you for something that's not wrong, then
[Guest]: you yourself becoming a part of the problem, right?
[Amit Varma]: Because you're allowing them to, you're allowing yourself to be a victim, basically, which
[Guest]: you don't have to.
[Amit Varma]: You don't have to.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm just thinking aloud here.
[Amit Varma]: It strikes me that, you know, for for most of us, and certainly for me, sexuality is
[Amit Varma]: something that is incidental.
[Amit Varma]: I happen to be heterosexual.
[Amit Varma]: And that's it.
[Amit Varma]: But it doesn't shape me in any other way than that.
[Amit Varma]: But would it be the case that for for you and for maybe for other gay people, you know,
[Amit Varma]: that your sexuality does shape you in much deeper ways, because that whole struggle of
[Amit Varma]: coming to terms with what you are and bringing it out to the world consumes you and makes
[Amit Varma]: you who you are?
[Guest]: It does, like almost every other gay friend I have, like has some level of social anxiety,
[Guest]: they live with like depression and they self doubt a lot.
[Guest]: You know, it's a very in depth problem because of like living with so much denial and you
[Guest]: know, not being able to come out can do like a lot of things wrong for you.
[Guest]: Internally, because you just like end up crying every night.
[Guest]: And I'm not even generalizing here, because I know a lot of friends who are going through
[Guest]: the same thing over and over again.
[Guest]: Exactly why there's so many suicide cases and so many, like, you know, all these high
[Guest]: fun situations happen because people push themselves and try to get the best out of
[Guest]: life when they can't really put a label to it, you know, and that kind of lifestyle kind
[Guest]: of ends up very tragically sometimes.
[Guest]: And at 17, I was very suicidal, I wanted to just like end my life and be done with it,
[Guest]: it seemed like an easy option.
[Guest]: So I think we have to talk about mental illness also very profoundly when it comes to gay
[Guest]: rights, because there's like a lot of extremism there as well, and we're not really controlling
[Guest]: it properly, you know.
[Guest]: And that's why I think a problem that is associated with coming out or with growing up gay is
[Guest]: that you suppress so much to an extent that you use every kind of method to like deal
[Guest]: with that.
[Guest]: And I've seen like, a lot of people in the community slowly, you know, giving up and
[Guest]: passing away in their own stride, you know, like how they ended their lives because they
[Amit Varma]: could not deal with the worries of how the world is.
[Amit Varma]: And the tragic part is that it's the fault of society or the state and whoever's fault
[Amit Varma]: it is, it's not their fault, they're victims.
[Amit Varma]: In a sense, every suicide is a murder in a manner of speaking.
[Amit Varma]: Let's then you know, move on from here to talk about the LGBT community and I'm sort
[Amit Varma]: of if I can show quote marks around the word community, because I often don't understand
[Amit Varma]: such terms.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the way I look at the world is we're all sort of just individuals.
[Amit Varma]: And yeah, we form communities around our interests or our identities or whatever, but they don't.
[Amit Varma]: What is this queer community?
[Guest]: So queer community is mainly a stronghold for a lot of people, because, as I said, like
[Guest]: a lot of parents do not accept their kids as they are, so they find their own families.
[Guest]: And hence the need for a queer community to be born.
[Guest]: Because if it dates back to the American Stonewall period, right, where a lot of people would
[Guest]: come together and party.
[Guest]: And even though they had varied interests, for example, some had drag queens coming in,
[Guest]: some had like lesbian butch women coming in, some had gay men coming into like hookup.
[Guest]: The normalcy was found that they were all the same kind of heathens, right?
[Guest]: And hence they would come together and party and they would like try to, again, back in
[Guest]: the day, extort money, cops would charge in on them, the Stonewall riots happened.
[Guest]: And like any riot that happens because of a community is because of the understanding
[Guest]: that they've all suffered from the same problems.
[Guest]: And if you were like a black lesbian, back in the 50s, you were already down the drain
[Guest]: because you were like, the lowest rung when it comes to understanding, if you're a white
[Guest]: gay man, you still have some privilege.
[Guest]: But if you're a black lesbian woman, you have a different kind of privilege, which is not
[Guest]: afforded to you.
[Guest]: So for them, fighting the supreme power became like a common thing.
[Guest]: And hence, the LGBT community around the world is fighting the same thing, finding the commonness
[Guest]: in being who you are at the same time, also finding love and acceptance within the community.
[Amit Varma]: And now it's where it is like, you know, it's a community, therefore, which is born not
[Amit Varma]: out of the identity you're born into, but it's a community of choice and necessity.
[Guest]: And is it therefore stronger for that reason?
[Guest]: It is because the commonness in the voice and the power with which the community hits
[Guest]: back, because it does have the most creative individuals overall.
[Guest]: And you know, if you look at the ad campaigns that have gone around the world in the past
[Guest]: few years, with regards to finding gay voices and giving them rights, you'll find a very
[Guest]: innovative way of storytelling because it's not just about fighting for rights, but also
[Guest]: about the right to love, right to like, you know, find the same kind of housing that everybody
[Guest]: else has.
[Guest]: So when you look at it from an emotional level, gay marriage is making more sense, because
[Guest]: then if you can't live with the person you love the most, then how would you even live?
[Guest]: And hence, the whole community became more stronger in the mid 2009 when Obama was like,
[Guest]: you know, and believe it or not, like everywhere around the world, America does influence the
[Guest]: thought pattern a lot when it comes to all the liberalist movements.
[Guest]: And so then when moved on to Europe as well, it became much easier for them to mimic these
[Guest]: movements and you know, allow people to vote for the right thing.
[Guest]: And if you look at like the ad campaign Ireland did to like get Paris to come out and vote
[Guest]: for their kids favour, because like, it's a matter of love.
[Guest]: And when you boil it down to love, it's all kind of coming together already.
[Guest]: So that's why the LGBT community has been ever inclusive, because now it's gone to QIA.
[Guest]: And you know, intersex, asexual, queer couples are also like a part of the whole gamut now.
[Guest]: And we are just getting to the tip of the iceberg now is what I mean.
[Guest]: And in India, how strong is it's pretty strong now, like in Bombay, and mainly metro cities
[Guest]: like Delhi, Bangalore and Kolkata and Chennai.
[Guest]: So they have like a lot of collectives coming together, a lot of people do a lot of different
[Guest]: things.
[Guest]: So people organize parties, some people do actual donation work, some people do research
[Guest]: work.
[Guest]: And you have like eight centres to help people diagnose themselves.
[Guest]: And research centres again for that very purpose.
[Guest]: So a lot of things happening in Bombay, when you do the pride, like every year, the number
[Guest]: of people participating increases along with the allies.
[Guest]: So from last year, it was 10,000, it went to 15,000 this year.
[Amit Varma]: And it's growing every year.
[Amit Varma]: I was struck by what you said earlier about how your first few relationships came by because
[Amit Varma]: of online dating.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, the need for online dating, therefore seems to indicate that the natural
[Amit Varma]: ecosystem within the real world where you meet other gay people simply wasn't that large.
[Amit Varma]: So you had to do online dating, that's the only way you could meet new people.
[Amit Varma]: Is that something that's changed?
[Amit Varma]: Is the ecosystem larger?
[Amit Varma]: And very specifically, if say a young 17 year old or 18 year old gay person is listening
[Amit Varma]: to this podcast right now, and he's like, I want to go out there and meet more people
[Amit Varma]: like me.
[Amit Varma]: What's he got to do?
[Guest]: So you have to like look up the local, they have to basically look out for the local queer
[Guest]: center that they can approach.
[Guest]: If you're in Bombay, you have the Hamsafar Trust, which is in Wakola, they do a lot of
[Guest]: community based fun open mics, and they do like a lot of Friday evening get togethers,
[Guest]: while at the same time helping people get diagnosed and stuff like that, you know, so
[Guest]: like, you'll always have a lot of these queer centers and collectives and open mics and
[Guest]: activities to participate in.
[Guest]: Don't go with the intention of hooking up to all of these, obviously, my whole thing
[Guest]: is that first go and learn the community, understand, meet people, understand different
[Guest]: behaviors, lifestyles, and you know, explore that side of it.
[Guest]: And then if you meet someone organically amazing, there are parties that associate with just
[Guest]: like getting you to drink and have a good time.
[Guest]: And a lot of things happen at these parties.
[Guest]: If that's your thing, then be about 21 and then have a good time.
[Guest]: Don't be 17 and go to these parties, because then your image of the community will be different
[Guest]: than what you have to perceive.
[Guest]: And go to a pride, go to a local bookstore, you'd say in a sense that you'd go to these
[Amit Varma]: for the same reason that as a kid, you went to church to find that sense of community
[Guest]: rather than, yes, you know, any specific.
[Guest]: So in that way, nothing's changed.
[Guest]: So you're still the altar boy, I'm still the altar boy, but this time on the other end
[Amit Varma]: of the spectrum.
[Amit Varma]: And how has popular culture changed through this time?
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, when you were a kid in the late 90s, early 2000s, like from whatever,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and one thing that is pretty obvious about Bollywood is that it's a tokenism.
[Amit Varma]: Sometimes they'll put a token gay out there, or sometimes they'll have a gay for comic
[Amit Varma]: effect and, you know, just, you know, perpetuate all those harmful stereotypes.
[Amit Varma]: And it's very rare that they actually like some of the most beautiful movies I've seen
[Amit Varma]: coming out of Hollywood in recent years, right from Brokeback Mountain to Moonlight, you
[Amit Varma]: know, do show gay love in such a beautiful way, but they have, I mean, apart from maybe
[Amit Varma]: I can offhand remember Kapoor and Sons, but how has popular culture adapted to this?
[Guest]: Bollywood is still grasping, you know, at its kind of roots, because remember Dostana?
[Guest]: Like, I remember Dostana happened at a very formative year in my life when I was like,
[Unknown]: still in the church trying to, you know, come out to my church friends.
[Guest]: But then we went to watch this movie at Gayety Galaxy together.
[Guest]: And I was just like, very taken aback because I'm like, they're not even gay, they're just
[Amit Varma]: like pretending to be gay.
[Amit Varma]: I'm just happy you didn't make a pun about Gayety Galaxy.
[Guest]: Continue.
[Guest]: Oh yeah.
[Guest]: You missed that.
[Guest]: I'll let that go this time.
[Guest]: But there is a magazine called Gayalaxy, by the way, it's a publication for the gays.
[Guest]: So they were all like enjoying the movie and I was like, this sounds so wrong as a movie.
[Guest]: It's just like pandering and it's not actually talking about gay rights, it's just like two
[Guest]: men acting gay to get a girl, that kind of stuff.
[Guest]: So I would just like, let it go.
[Guest]: And that's why when I was exposed to Western media, it was easier.
[Guest]: So if you watch Will and Grace or if you watch Modern Family, if you watch Queer as Folk,
[Guest]: then you get an idea of how it's a part of their culture, you know.
[Guest]: And since I was born in the 90s, right, so when I got to 2000s, the situation was much
[Guest]: better for the queers around India.
[Guest]: Like there were parties and there were associative events happening in scarcity.
[Guest]: But now, because it's been like spoken about so much and like everybody wants to get on
[Guest]: board this whole ship and be an ally and get on the bandwagon of, you know, being cool
[Guest]: because you're pro-gay, it's very common now.
[Guest]: So it's not such a rarity as it was when I was like 17 or 18.
[Guest]: Now I can go to a queer event every evening, every evening or every weekend almost now.
[Guest]: So it's a pretty chill situation.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, you've been doing this very interesting show Keeping It Queer for quite
[Amit Varma]: a long time.
[Amit Varma]: I think your season two just got over.
[Amit Varma]: And what you do in the show for my listeners, and I recommend to my listeners that they
[Amit Varma]: check it out at IVMpodcast.com.
[Amit Varma]: Just look on the shows, look for Keeping It Queer.
[Amit Varma]: It's a fantastic show.
[Amit Varma]: While doing the show, what are the sort of insights that you gained about what in a sense
[Guest]: was your community itself?
[Guest]: I think that there's still a lot of sexism in the queer community itself, like it still
[Guest]: becomes a man show at the end, so the gay men think that they're entitled in some way.
[Guest]: And so there's still a lot of like toxic masculinity and, you know, a lot of these behaviour within
[Amit Varma]: the gay community.
[Guest]: And like they look down upon lesbians and trans women who mainly are the foremost leaders
[Guest]: in the community.
[Guest]: And I've really ended up, because when I was growing up also, like, you know, the sight
[Guest]: of a trans person begging for money at the signal or in the train would scare me because
[Guest]: I was brought up in that kind of mentality.
[Guest]: But the most humane touch that I've had, you know, the most humane interactions I've had
[Guest]: after being a part of the community is with trans people and understanding their stories
[Guest]: has been like the most poignant moment in my life.
[Guest]: Like I've spoken to so many people, not only on record on Keeping It Queer, but like in
[Guest]: real life otherwise as well.
[Guest]: Just the fact that they have gone through so much more than I could have ever gone makes
[Guest]: me understand the need for the struggle, the need for talking about it on a bigger platform
[Guest]: and getting to normalise this conversation because they have just been mistreated everywhere,
[Guest]: you know, like with jobs, with medical, healthcare, with their own families that thrown out, defined
[Guest]: their own communities.
[Guest]: And despite people being aware that, you know, India comes from a very strong culturally
[Guest]: heritage wise, we are very strong in terms of respecting our trans people.
[Guest]: They were put in the uppermost rungs of like the King's Sabha.
[Guest]: So like what happened and how did we go wrong?
[Guest]: And the understanding of that helped me empathise a lot more with the trans community of this
[Amit Varma]: country.
[Amit Varma]: And you were, of course, extremely fortunate, not just sort of in your background relatively,
[Amit Varma]: but also that you had comedy in your art as an outlet to which you could turn writing
[Guest]: as an outlet.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of people don't have that and things are tough for them.
[Amit Varma]: And through the course of doing this show, you speak spoken to so many different kinds
[Amit Varma]: of people.
[Amit Varma]: At what level, for you, when you think about the struggle that your life involves, does
[Amit Varma]: it involve not just a personal struggle of coming to terms with who you are and doing
[Amit Varma]: what you have to do and the personal struggles of your art, but also this larger struggle
[Amit Varma]: where, you know, you want to make India more progressive in this sense and sort of advance
[Guest]: the cause of the queer community as it were.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And also like to tell them that, hey, listen to these love stories of these people, you
[Guest]: know, people, when they come to my show, I don't tell them like, oh, we're going to be
[Guest]: preachy about this.
[Guest]: Just tell me what happened in your life.
[Guest]: So they'll be like, oh, I had a crush on this person.
[Guest]: I was a girl and I had a crush on a girl.
[Guest]: And then she fell in love with me.
[Guest]: And then we had the longest dating time, you know, and that makes me so happy because they're
[Guest]: not pretending to be anybody else than who they are and telling me a story that would
[Guest]: happen in anybody else's life.
[Guest]: So the idea was always to create conversations which are still normalizing the whole idea
[Guest]: that we also have lives.
[Guest]: It's just that we don't flash it too much because we're afraid that you won't like it.
[Guest]: But maybe in this way, when you listen to our stories, you'll like it, you'll understand
[Guest]: that we do come with a certain sense of fear because of how we are treated in society.
[Guest]: So that's why we need all these stories to come out and say that there's a promise for
[Guest]: a better tomorrow, even though it's going to be very rigorous and slow, we still have
[Guest]: hope that it'll get just better.
[Guest]: And that's what like last year's Pride was, it gets better, was the theme of the Pride.
[Amit Varma]: That's a lovely line.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So it was so amazing because I went to the Pride with my microphone and spoke to so many
[Unknown]: people.
[Guest]: So I did a queer edition for the Pride that year.
[Guest]: And hence all these stories when I was setting out to put them together, it was like a audio
[Amit Varma]: journal, so to say, of these stories.
[Amit Varma]: And where is it?
[Guest]: Where can people listen to this?
[Guest]: It's on ivampodcast.com only.
[Guest]: So it's like, so that's the whole idea that I want to have all these people who are out
[Guest]: to talk about it.
[Guest]: So when a kid looks up for it, when they're discovering queer identities and everything,
[Guest]: they'll have some kind of research work to go back to, which is again, like a very Indian
[Guest]: voice, you know, because as I said, I went to men from around the world to understand
[Guest]: what they went through.
[Guest]: But the situation is very differently perceived in India.
[Guest]: So I wanted to give listeners a chance to understand the queer Indian identity from
[Guest]: the podcast perspective.
[Amit Varma]: Is there any of this happening in the languages itself or it's just sort of English?
[Guest]: I do speak to people in Marathi and Hindi as well on the show.
[Guest]: But like, again, my language skills are mostly stronger in English.
[Guest]: So we stuck to that.
[Guest]: But there's also like, a lot of insight into what's it like to come from different backgrounds
[Guest]: and have different identities also, from around the country that to like, you know, I've spoken
[Guest]: to people on Skype and we had Alok Vaid Menon, they are a spoken word poet from America,
[Guest]: femme and very proudly so, so, so they actually face a lot of homophobia in America when they
[Guest]: walk on the streets.
[Guest]: So it was important to get their story when they came down to India, I kind of found them
[Guest]: and Shakti and Alok came and they did a great episode with me.
[Guest]: So hence, I feel like, when you go back to understanding why you wanted to do this, there
[Guest]: has to be a purpose to this, right?
[Guest]: So when we finally got all these stories, and I'd look back at it, and people find me
[Guest]: online and message me saying that, hey, I heard your podcast, it helped me cope with
[Guest]: so much.
[Guest]: It means a lot to me eventually that I did not go on a on a save your mission at all.
[Guest]: I was just like, I hope that someone did this for me.
[Amit Varma]: And that's what I'm going to do for them.
[Guest]: Had you heard something like this, when you were 15 or 16?
[Guest]: I would have been so much calmer and I would have been okay coming out sooner, but it didn't
[Amit Varma]: happen.
[Amit Varma]: So that's amazing.
[Amit Varma]: Let me sort of I've taken a lot of your time, let me end with a dual question that is almost
[Amit Varma]: a cliche now, but I ask all guests of my show on whatever subject they're talking about,
[Amit Varma]: is that what makes you despair?
[Amit Varma]: And what makes you hopeful about the future of gay rights in India?
[Guest]: So the ignorance that we still have in the country with regards to gay rights, when I
[Guest]: talk to people about Section 377, they don't have any idea what that law is.
[Guest]: Some people don't know a gay friend also, they don't have any kind of common sense.
[Amit Varma]: Or if they do, they don't know that they know a gay friend.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: And that's doubly tragic.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So that is a lot of despair there, because I hope that everybody gets to feel the way
[Guest]: I get to feel, you know, and I'm entitled and I'm happy that way.
[Guest]: But not many people can afford to like come out so easily, which is making me sadder.
[Guest]: And what makes me hopeful is that there's a very strong ally movement in this country,
[Guest]: people, women, especially, who have felt the same kind of, you know, the society's rebuked
[Guest]: them on a certain level.
[Guest]: So they understand.
[Guest]: So I've made such great friendship with women who are so admirable in their own way, and
[Guest]: they go out of their way to help me out, deal with my own mental anxiety.
[Amit Varma]: And because they're also victims, and they're fighting society in their own way.
[Guest]: So I found the strongest women in this country have been my strongest allies in some way
[Guest]: or the other.
[Guest]: And even men who go on the femme side, I find them so adorable in their own way, you know,
[Guest]: like people, whenever they tell you like, that whole Biola tag is gone from my head
[Guest]: entirely now.
[Guest]: Now I look at men who are flamboyant, and I lose my shit and I become one of them, you
[Guest]: know, like, because I've always been an expressive kid, but I would hide that to become a part
[Guest]: of society.
[Guest]: But when I'm dancing with them, or whenever I'm being a very stereotypical gay character,
[Guest]: but I'd be like, okay, girl, don't talk like that, you know, swinging our fingers and everything
[Guest]: snapping around.
[Guest]: I feel happy, like, there's hope that I can talk like that one day and be okay in society.
[Amit Varma]: That's beautiful.
[Amit Varma]: I learned a lot talking to you.
[Amit Varma]: And I think we just touched the surface of, you know, what we could talk about, but it's
[Amit Varma]: already been more than an hour.
[Amit Varma]: So thanks a lot for coming on the show.
[Guest]: Thank you so much, it was an honor.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the show, do go on to ivmpodcast.com and look for Keeping
[Amit Varma]: It Queer.
[Amit Varma]: The two seasons of it are over and there are some outstanding, very moving episodes, very
[Amit Varma]: funny episodes.
[Amit Varma]: So do check them out.
[Amit Varma]: Also, look for Naveen's show The Good Child coming in a city near you or in your city
[Amit Varma]: soon.
[Amit Varma]: Tickets available on BookMyShow.
[Amit Varma]: He'll be in Kolkata on September 9, and Goa on September 16.
[Amit Varma]: If you're there, watch the show.
[Amit Varma]: If you're not there, fly down.
[Amit Varma]: You can also follow Naveen on Twitter at HouseofNarohana.
[Amit Varma]: And you can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen on seenunseen.in.
[Unknown]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: How aware do you think you are of your laws and rights?
[Unknown]: Do you look up to laws when you're caught up in situations?
[Unknown]: Do you know what your rights are when you're stuck somewhere bad?
[Unknown]: Well, here's a show that can help you move an inch closer to being aware of what your
[Unknown]: rights are.
[Unknown]: Tune in to Know Your Kanun with me, Amar Rana.
[Unknown]: This is a podcast meant to answer all your law-related queries.
[Unknown]: Catch Know Your Kanun every week on the IVM website or the app or anywhere you get your
[Unknown]: podcasts from.
[Unknown]: Hi my name is Anupam Gupta, I'm B50 on Twitter.
[Unknown]: I am the host of Pesa Pesa, the show that talks money.
[Unknown]: On my show, I speak to experts from every field of money and finance, from stock markets,
[Unknown]: equities, debt funds, credit cards, life insurance, every possible area of money and finance that
[Unknown]: you can think of.
[Unknown]: We even did an episode on cryptocurrency.
[Unknown]: I've got fantastic guests from mutual funds to personal finance experts everywhere, robo
[Unknown]: advisory startups, just name it, we've got it.
[Unknown]: At Pesa Pesa, we help you make smart decisions about money.
[Unknown]: You work hard for money, now make your money work hard for you.
[Unknown]: New episodes out every Monday and you can listen to my show on the IVM podcast app or
[Unknown]: any other podcasting app that you have.